<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title epub:type="z3998:roman">XLIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-44" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIV</h2>
			<p>
				<em>Extract from letter written by Miss Olive Stirling to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cecil Bruce:</em>
			</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>It’s really disgusting that Doss’ crazy adventures should have turned out like this. It makes one feel that there is no use in behaving properly.</p>
				<p>I’m <em>sure</em> her mind was unbalanced when she left home. What she said about a dust-pile showed that. Of course I don’t think there was ever a thing the matter with her heart. Or perhaps Snaith or Redfern or whatever his name really is fed Purple Pills to her, back in that Mistawis hut and cured her. It would make quite a testimonial for the family ads, wouldn’t it?</p>
				<p>He’s such an insignificent-looking creature. I mentioned this to Doss but all she said was, ‘I don’t like collar ad men.’</p>
				<p>Well, he’s certainly no collar ad man. Though I must say there is something rather distinguished about him, now that he has cut his hair and put on decent clothes. I really think, Cecil, you should exercise more. It doesn’t do to get too fleshy.</p>
				<p>He also claims, I believe, to be John Foster. We can believe <em>that</em> or not, as we like, I suppose.</p>
				<p>Old Doc Redfern has given them two millions for a wedding-present. Evidently the Purple Pills bring in the bacon. They’re going to spend the fall in Italy and the winter in Egypt and motor through Normandy in apple-blossom time. <em>Not</em> in that dreadful old Lizzie, though. Redfern has got a wonderful new car.</p>
				<p>Well, I think I’ll run away, too, and disgrace myself. It seems to pay.</p>
				<p>Uncle Ben is a scream. Likewise Uncle James. The fuss they all make over Doss now is absolutely sickening. To hear Aunt Amelia talking of ‘my son-in-law, Bernard Redfern’ and ‘my daughter, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bernard Redfern.’ Mother and Father are as bad as the rest. And they can’t see that Valancy is just laughing at them all in her sleeve.</p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
